
Step n. For each use of transmute consider if the logic can be simplified or made cleaner.
Step o. Rename the new method to the old method. Unless you like the new name better.

the end of the 14 step refactoring.

What are the manual refactoring steps to change the return type of a function.
I extracted a method and then a method object out of a webservice endpoint to separate the business logic from the web mechanics. But I still had a return type of Response.
I want a clean separation of the business logic from the web functionality.


You must be able to map from the old return value to the new one and back for this refactoring to work.

1. Extract the body of the original function into a new function. Most of the work will be done on this new function.

2. Create the new return type if it doesn't already exist.

3. Create a Holder class for the new return type. A simple class with a public field is sufficient. This class is not expected to survive past the end of the refactoring.
   It will be used as an out parameter to keep the code compiling and working.

4. Add the Holder class as a Parameter to the new function.

5. In the new function, each place there is a return statement set the field of the holder class to an instance of the new return type.

6. Write a mapping function from the new return type to the old return type.
   While it may make sense to put this function on the new return type, if one of the reasons to do the refactoring is to insulate business logic from the transport layer
   that may not be desirable. The mapping function can also be placed in the caller.
   
7. In the old function, use the mapping function on the contents of the Holder class to return the correct type.
   The current return value of the new function is ignored.
   
8. Change the return type of the new function. This will cause a compile error, but it is isolated to the new function. Correct the compile errors by returning the same value placed in the Holder class.

9. In the old function, use the new return value of the new function as the argument to the mapping function.

10. Remove the Holder parameter from the method signature.

11. Delete the Holder class.

12. For each use of the old method: Inline the old method removing its use.
    If the old function is overridden by a subclass, this is the time to perform the same refactoring on the subclass to change to the new signature.
    
13. For each use of the mapping function consider if the logic can be simplified or made cleaner.

14. Rename the new method to the old method. Unless you like the new name better.